Module 6: Database Connectivity and Final Project

6.1 Introduction to Databases

-SQL and Relational Databases

SQL (Structured Query Language) is used to manage and manipulate relational databases.

Relational Databases store data in tables with rows and columns.

Each table has a primary key to uniquely identify records.

SQL Commands:

DDL (Data Definition Language) – CREATE, ALTER, DROP.

DML (Data Manipulation Language) – INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, SELECT.

Normalization avoids data redundancy and improves efficiency.

SQL enables data retrieval, modification, and security with queries.

-Database Design and Normalization

Database design ensures efficient data organization in a relational database.

Entities & Attributes: Entities represent objects (e.g., Student), attributes define properties (name, age).

Relationships: One-to-One, One-to-Many, Many-to-Many.

Normalization: A process that removes redundancy and improves efficiency.

1NF: Eliminates duplicate columns.

2NF: Removes partial dependencies.

3NF: Eliminates transitive dependencies.

ER Diagrams: Graphical representation of entities and their relationships.

6.2 Java Database Connectivity (JDBC)

-JDBC Drivers and Architecture

JDBC (Java Database Connectivity) is an API for connecting Java applications to databases.

JDBC uses drivers to communicate with relational databases.

Types of JDBC Drivers:

Type 1: JDBC-ODBC Bridge (Deprecated).

Type 2: Native-API Driver.

Type 3: Network Protocol Driver.

Type 4: Thin Driver (Most commonly used).

JDBC API Components:

DriverManager: Manages database connections.

Connection: Establishes a session with the database.

Statement & PreparedStatement: Execute queries.

-Connecting to a Database

Connecting a Java application to a database is done using JDBC (Java Database Connectivity).

Load the JDBC Driver: Class.forName("com.mysql.cj.jdbc.Driver");

Establish a Connection using DriverManager.getConnection():

java

Connection conn = DriverManager.getConnection("jdbc:mysql://localhost:3306/db", "user", "password");
Execute Queries using Statement or PreparedStatement.

Close the Connection to prevent memory leaks: conn.close();.

JDBC allows interaction with databases securely and efficiently.


-Executing Queries and Managing Transactions

JDBC provides methods to execute queries and manage transactions in a database.

Executing Queries:

executeQuery() for retrieving data (SELECT).

executeUpdate() for modifying data (INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE).

Transactions ensure atomicity and consistency:

conn.setAutoCommit(false); begins a transaction.

conn.commit(); saves all changes.

conn.rollback(); reverts changes if an error occurs.

6.3 Object-Relational Mapping (ORM) with Hibernate

-Introduction to Hibernate

Hibernate is a Java-based ORM (Object-Relational Mapping) framework that simplifies database operations.

It allows developers to map Java objects to database tables without writing complex SQL queries.

Hibernate eliminates boilerplate JDBC code by handling connections, queries, and transactions.

It supports multiple database engines like MySQL, PostgreSQL, and Oracle.

Key Features: Automatic table creation, caching, and lazy loading.

The configuration is done via XML (hibernate.cfg.xml) or Java annotations (@Entity).

-Mapping Java Objects to Database Tables

Hibernate uses annotations or XML configurations to map Java objects to database tables.

A class is marked as an entity using @Entity, and a table is defined with @Table(name="table_name").

Each field is mapped to a column using @Column(name="column_name").

Primary keys are defined with @Id, and auto-generation is enabled using @GeneratedValue.

Example:

java

@Entity
@Table(name = "students")
public class Student {
    @Id @GeneratedValue(strategy = GenerationType.IDENTITY)
    private int id;
    private String name;
}
This structure allows Hibernate to automatically generate database tables.

-CRUD Operations with Hibernate

CRUD (Create, Read, Update, Delete) operations in Hibernate are performed using Session and Transaction APIs.

Create (Insert Data):

java

session.save(entity);
Read (Retrieve Data):

java

session.get(Entity.class, id);
Update (Modify Data):

java

session.update(entity);
Delete (Remove Data):

java

session.delete(entity);
Transactions must be committed (session.getTransaction().commit()) to save changes.

6.4 Building a Complete Java Application

-Designing Database Schema

Designing a database schema involves structuring tables, relationships, and constraints to efficiently store and manage data.

Identify entities (e.g., User, Product, Order) and define attributes (columns).

Establish primary keys (id as PRIMARY KEY) and foreign keys (user_id in Orders table).

Normalize data using 1NF, 2NF, and 3NF to eliminate redundancy.

Use appropriate data types (e.g., VARCHAR, INTEGER, BOOLEAN).

Define indexes on frequently queried columns for faster searches.

Store relationships using one-to-one, one-to-many, and many-to-many mappings.



-Developing GUI and Business Logic

A Java application has two key components: GUI (Graphical User Interface) and Business Logic.

GUI is built using Swing, JavaFX, or AWT to handle user interactions.

Business logic manages data processing, validation, and rule enforcement.

Use MVC (Model-View-Controller) to separate UI from logic.

Event-driven programming ensures UI elements respond to user actions.

Forms include buttons, text fields, and dropdowns to collect data.



-Integrating Database with Application

Database integration allows a Java application to store and retrieve data dynamically.

Use JDBC (Java Database Connectivity) to connect with MySQL, PostgreSQL, or SQLite.

Establish a connection using DriverManager.getConnection(url, user, password).

Execute queries using Prepared Statements (stmt.executeQuery("SELECT * FROM users")).

Close the connection after queries to free up resources.

Use connection pooling (HikariCP) for efficient database management.

6.5 Final Project

-Project Planning and Implementation

Project planning involves defining goals, scope, timeline, and resources before development begins.

Identify requirements and create a roadmap with milestones.

Choose technologies (Java, Spring Boot, MySQL, React) based on project needs.

Use Agile methodology with sprints and iterations for flexibility.

Design high-level architecture (frontend, backend, database).

Create prototypes and proof of concepts (PoCs) to test feasibility.

Implementation follows coding, integration, and deployment phases.

-Testing and Debugging

Testing ensures that the software is bug-free, efficient, and meets user expectations.

Unit Testing (JUnit, TestNG) verifies individual components.

Integration Testing ensures modules work together correctly.

Manual Testing checks UI and functionality.

Debugging Tools (Eclipse, IntelliJ Debugger) help identify and fix errors.

Logging (Log4j, SLF4J) tracks errors and system behavior.

-Future Enhancements

Future enhancements help improve software performance, features, and user experience.

Upgrade to new frameworks (e.g., Spring Boot updates).

Improve scalability using microservices.

Implement AI-based features for automation.

Enhance security with multi-factor authentication (MFA).

Optimize database performance with sharding and caching.
